The Project Gutenberg eBook of The shasta route along the southern
pacific--the road of a thousand wonders, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The shasta route along the southern pacific--the road of a
       thousand wonders
       A scenic guide book from San Francisco, California, to Portland,
       Oregon on the road of a thousand wonders

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 10, 2022 [eBook #68494]

Language: English

Produced by: Juliet Sutherland, Charlie Howard, The Internet Archive,
             and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHASTA ROUTE ALONG THE
SOUTHERN PACIFIC--THE ROAD OF A THOUSAND WONDERS ***





Transcriber’s Notes:


Italic text is enclosed in _underscores_. Boldface is enclosed in
=equals signs.=

The Table of Contents for this picture book is its “_Explanation of
Views Illustrated_”.





[Illustration: _MOUNT SHASTA FROM RESERVOIR LAKE._]

THE SHASTA ROUTE

ALONG the

SOUTHERN PACIFIC--THE ROAD of a THOUSAND WONDERS




[Illustration:

                                  THE
                              SHASTA ROUTE

                        →IN ALL OF ITS GRANDEUR←

                          A SCENIC GUIDE BOOK

          From San Francisco, California, to Portland, Oregon

                   On the Road of a Thousand Wonders


The illustrations shown in the following pages are all made expressly
for this book from photographs taken by special artists of the most
striking objects of interest, which abound to a remarkable extent along
the Southern Pacific Railroad, between San Francisco and Portland.
Great care was taken to select only such views as every traveler
actually sees along the line, so that the book truly forms a panorama
of scenic wonders which is unrolled every day before the eyes of
those who make this trip. Everyone desires to secure souvenirs of the
journey, and, knowing this, we have endeavored to make this volume
such a record of facts, and such a collection of beautiful, accurate
and attractive views, that it will be recognized by all as the most
appropriate and interesting souvenir of the journey. =For sale only en
route on the trains on the Shasta Route.=


                          EXCLUSIVE EDITION.

Copyrighted by Curt Teich & Co., Chicago.

                             Price $1.50
]




    The charm of a trip along the Shasta Route of the Southern
    Pacific, often termed “The Road of a Thousand Wonders,” is
    recognized by the traveled world. It offers a succession of
    grandeur and scenic beauty unexcelled by any railroad trip
    in America.


_EXPLANATION OF VIEWS ILLUSTRATED_


MOUNT SHASTA FROM RESERVOIR LAKE (COVER)

This is one of the most famous views of this imperial mountain peak.


THE FERRY BUILDING

From the Ferry Building, at the foot of Market Street, the ferry boats
of the Southern Pacific take the traveler across San Francisco Bay
to Oakland Pier. The Ferry Building, erected in 1896 at a cost of
$1,000,000, is the water gate of San Francisco, where rail and tide
meet. There is scarcely a minute in the day when there is not a ferry
either arriving at or departing from some one of the ferry slips.


VIEW OF SAN FRANCISCO, SHOWING THE HARBOR, OAKLAND, AND MOUNT DIABLO IN
THE DISTANCE

San Francisco, the starting point of this journey, is the largest and
best known of the cities on the Pacific Coast. This bird’s eye view of
lower San Francisco, the Ferry Building and San Francisco Bay, shows
the splendid body of water facing the city. This Bay is seventy miles
long and from three to ten miles wide, and has an area of four hundred
and fifty square miles. Vessels of all descriptions, and from all
parts of the globe, populate San Francisco harbor, which is the pride
and marvel of all navigators. Yerba Buena Island is seen on the left,
++the trans-bay cities of Oakland, Berkeley and Alameda, and ferryboat
landings in the middle distance, while in the distance is seen Mount
Diablo.


OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA

Oakland, the third largest city in California is but eighteen minutes
from San Francisco via the Southern Pacific’s fine transbay steamers.

With its fine harbor facilities, Oakland is rapidly growing as a
commercial center, carrying on an extensive coastwise and foreign
trade. Its position on the east side of the bay, makes it a great
railroad terminal for all lines from the north, south and east.

As a community of homes, Oakland has a well deserved fame, for its
setting is picturesque and the climate nears perfection.

Oakland has many attractive parks and public playgrounds. Lake Merritt,
near the Civic Center is a natural water-park, and state game reserve,
where thousands of wild ducks make their winter home, an unusual sight,
indeed. Boating may be enjoyed every day in the year.

Oakland’s City Hall, with its massive tower, is the tallest building in
California, its height being 377 feet.


FERRY BOAT “CONTRA COSTA”

This ferry carries Southern Pacific trains and passengers between
Port Costa and Benicia, crossing the Carquinez Straits. The distance
is about a mile and requires about twenty minutes. The ferry was
constructed as a sister ship to the ferry “Solano” and is the largest
ferry in the world. It is 433 feet long, cost $450,000, and has a
capacity of 36 cars and two engines.


LASSEN PEAK, LASSEN VOLCANIC NATIONAL PARK

Lassen Peak, California, is the latest scene of volcanic activity on
the Pacific Coast, adding another point of interest along “The Road of
a Thousand Wonders.” Lassen Peak with its elevation of 10,577 feet, can
be seen from the car windows of the “Shasta Route” trains, and can be
visited from Red Bluff or Redding by automobile.


SACRAMENTO RIVER AND MT. SHASTA FROM CASTELLA

This is one of the finest views in the canyon, with the mighty form of
Mt. Shasta in the background. The great white cap extends 14,444 feet
above the sea. The foothill counties tributary to this valley are rich
in gold and other minerals, while the rich soil of the entire valley
is adapted to raising of a most diverse variety of crops. The upper
canyon of the Sacramento River constantly presents to the traveler an
ever-changing scene of astounding splendor.


CASTLE CRAGS IN SACRAMENTO CANYON

Castle Crags, in the Sacramento Canyon, are great granite rocks, rising
close beside the track, to a height of 4,000 feet. Their vertical
strata splintered into a hundred parapets, makes this a scene never to
be forgotten. Beyond the Crags is Castle Lake at an elevation of 7,245
feet, and from this point appears the rounded summit of Mt. Shasta,
silver against the turquoise sky; a watch tower of the world, gazing
ever toward the eternal.


MOSSBRAE FALLS AT SHASTA SPRINGS

Here one of the enormous streams which have their origin in the melting
snows of Mt. Shasta, divides itself into a myriad of little waterways
before reaching the top of a wooded semi-circular cliff, from which
point it tumbles into the Sacramento River, a hundred feet below,
forming Mossbrae Falls, as they appear like a thousand springs born
under the rocky ground.


SHASTA SPRINGS, CALIFORNIA

Shasta Springs, near the base of Mount Shasta, is one of the best-known
all-the-year-around resorts in the world. Here the train stops long
enough for a drink of the famous sparkling Shasta water, real soda
water. This resort is noted for its scenic beauty and its health-giving
water.


CANTARA LOOP, 18TH CROSSING, SACRAMENTO RIVER, CALIFORNIA

The train spends five hours crossing and recrossing the Sacramento
River. This loop was devised to get out of the canyon and up on the
plateau where stands Mt. Shasta, with its snowy summit, as seen from
the car windows; nothing could be a more glorious tribute to the
marvelous skill of the modern railroad engineer, than the obstacles met
with and overcome in building a railroad through this rugged country.


SISSON, AT THE BASE OF MOUNT SHASTA

At this point the traveler finds himself at the base of the mountain,
and if he desires, can arrange a genuine Alpine mountain climbing trip.
The town stands at the base of the mountain and a road runs to the edge
of the timber line, which has made possible an ascent of the mountain
in a single day. The wonderful view from the summit, 14,444 feet above
the sea, is bounded only by the curvature of the world’s disc, and
there is not a finer view to be had anywhere.


PANORAMA OF MT. SHASTA AND BLACK BUTTE

There are numerous volcanic cones scattered throughout this part of
California. One of the best-known is Black Butte, also called Muirs
Peak. Its cone is almost perpendicular to a height of almost 6,000
feet, close to the base of Mt. Shasta--black, bare and desolate, an
extinct volcano, with half a dozen craters in plain view. Mt. Shasta
is an extinct volcano, one of the highest peaks on the North American
Continent. Its snows and glaciers feed hundreds of streams which thread
the wild region in every direction. These wild regions are a paradise
for the sportsman and lover of nature. Grizzly, black and cinnamon bear
abound, elk, deer and mountain sheep are plenty, as well as a great
variety of smaller game. The streams are alive with trout.


MOUNT SHASTA FROM EDGEWOOD

Here is one of the favorite view points of this great snow-capped
mountain and where the majestic grandeur of the mountain is most
apparent. Edgewood, as the name suggests, is literally the edge of the
forest. From this point to the summit of the Siskiyous there is very
little timber.


MT. McLOUGHLIN FROM UPPER KLAMATH LAKE

The Klamath Country has no superior as a pleasure realm for the
sportsman and camper, and of unusual interest to tourists. Much of this
region is still a wilderness, full of the charm of mountain and forest.
Its marches are breeding grounds for wild fowl; its clear streams and
broad lakes are full of lusty, hard-fighting trout, and in its forests
roam deer, bear and cougars. Mount McLoughlin, the highest peak in
southern Oregon, is 9,760 feet above sea level.


WIZARD ISLAND, CRATER LAKE NATIONAL PARK

Crater Lake lies in the heart of the Cascade Range, in southern Oregon,
its surface 6,177 feet above sea level. As its name suggests, it is the
crater of an extinct volcano. Crater Lake has been sounded to a depth
of 1,996 feet and declared by scientists to be the deepest inland body
of water in the world. Rising almost sheer from the water’s edge, the
rim of the lava cliffs attain at places a height of 2,000 feet. From
Crater Lake Lodge, on the rim of the lake, the opposite shore is six
miles away. Wizard Island is a perfectly preserved cinder cone rising
nearly 1,000 feet above the lake. You may climb the slaggy timbered
cone of Wizard Island and descend one hundred feet into its crater
which is five hundred feet across.


LOOP TUNNELS 14 AND 15 IN SISKIYOU MOUNTAINS

This picture represents one of the difficulties of railroads through
this rugged mountain range and shows elevation is overcome by the
use of tunnels. A tunnel is cut through the rocks; a circuit is made
leading back to the same point at a higher elevation and another tunnel
is cut directly over the first one. The traveler will find this a most
interesting view as the train winds its way through these mountains.


GOLD RAY DAM, SHOWING TABLE MOUNTAIN AND ROGUE RIVER

Table Rock is familiar in Indian history as the place where Captain
Jack of the Modoc Indians made his last stand; was captured and hung
at Old Fort Klamath, ending the historical Modoc war. Snow-capped Mt.
Pitt, rising to an altitude of 9,760 feet, is visible from this point.


HELL GATE, ROGUE RIVER

This picture shows the character of the upper stretches of this
splendid trout stream. Anglers cross the continent for the joys of
fishing this stream. The line of the Shasta Route from Medford to
Crater Lake follows this canyon and affords many beautiful views.


COW CREEK CANYON

Despite its unromantic title, this canyon has few rivals in the
attractiveness of its scenery. For a long way, the tracks run parallel
to the stream, which races in rapid rivalry with the train. Its rugged
walls on every hand form grotesque outlines, suggesting weird figures
to the imagination of a nature-loving mind.


THE WILLIAMETTE RIVER, OREGON

The Southern Pacific “Shasta Route” follows for 150 miles, the
beautiful Williamette River, and from the car windows, may be glimpsed
views of its wooded banks, its gleaming reaches and winding course that
will delight the beholder. The Williamette Valley through which it
flows is the principal valley of Western Oregon.


MOUNT HOOD FROM LOST LAKE

This mountain is often spoken of as the “Pride of Oregon.” Its
uppermost peak reaches an altitude of 11,225 feet and is plainly
visible from many points on this part of “The Road of a Thousand
Wonders.” While this grand mountain is easy to climb, the ascent is
steep and the alpenstock and rope are used to aid one in his upward
journey. On the top one finds a region of perpetual snow, but the view
is indescribably grand. The trip to the summit is one of the most
popular trips out of Portland.


PORTLAND, OREGON. MOUNT HOOD IN DISTANCE

Portland, often termed the “Rose City,” has many natural advantages
and points of interest to the traveler. This popular name is derived
from the city’s beautiful parks and homes, where roses are in abundance
everywhere. A trip up the Columbia River from Portland will leave an
impression on the traveler never to be forgotten. Mountain climbing and
ocean bathing are popular sports that help to make Portland a favorite
stopping point.


[Illustration: (map)

  SOUTHERN PACIFIC LINES
  SUNSET, OGDEN AND SHASTA ROUTES
  AND CONNECTIONS
]

[Illustration: FRONT VIEW OF FERRY BUILDING, SAN FRANCISCO, 125,000
PERSONS PASS THROUGH ITS PORTALS DAILY.]

[Illustration: SAN FRANCISCO AND BAY, OAKLAND, BERKELEY AND ALAMEDA IN
DISTANCE]

[Illustration: VISTA OF BEAUTIFUL LAKE MERRITT, OAKLAND]

[Illustration: FERRY BOAT “CONTRA COSTA”]

[Illustration: LASSEN PEAK--LASSEN VOLCANIC NATIONAL PARK]

[Illustration: SACRAMENTO RIVER AND MT. SHASTA, FROM CASTELLA]

[Illustration: CASTLE CRAGS IN SACRAMENTO CANYON]

[Illustration: MOSSBRAE FALLS AT SHASTA SPRINGS]

[Illustration: SHASTA SPRINGS]

[Illustration: CANTARA LOOP, 18TH CROSSING, SACRAMENTO RIVER]

[Illustration: SISSON AT THE BASE OF MOUNT SHASTA]

[Illustration: PANORAMA OF MOUNT SHASTA AND BLACK BUTTE]

[Illustration: MOUNT SHASTA FROM POINT NEAR EDGEWOOD]

[Illustration: KLAMATH LAKE AND MT. McLOUGHLIN]

[Illustration: WIZARD ISLAND, CRATER LAKE]

[Illustration: LOOP TUNNELS 14 AND 15 IN SISKIYOU MOUNTAINS]

[Illustration: GOLD RAY DAM, SHOWING TABLE MOUNTAIN AND ROGUE RIVER]

[Illustration: HELL GATE, ROGUE RIVER]

[Illustration: COW CREEK CANYON]

[Illustration: WILLIAMETTE RIVER]

[Illustration: MOUNT HOOD, FROM LOST LAKE]

[Illustration: PORTLAND, OREGON, MOUNT HOOD IN DISTANCE]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHASTA ROUTE ALONG THE
SOUTHERN PACIFIC--THE ROAD OF A THOUSAND WONDERS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
